It's not just Moroccans you've made happy with the Moroccan team, is it? Ronaldo,
he's extraordinary against Diego. Die to Diego. Wait, why don't you sit at PSG or
OM? You each arrived at the stadium, one guy on a moped, one guy in a taxi. Guys who arrive in
taxis, there are two or three in a taxi. Who was the meanest? Stanstam. Oh yeah, Manchester United,
he's a miner. He weighs 140 kg. I say he said he's Robocop like that. I say but he's going to kill me.
Hello everyone, welcome to a new episode of Campo. Very happy to be back with you during a
special time, a special Africa Cup of Nations, Morocco 2025. We're a little bit
in the middle of nowhere in a remote but dreamlike place at the home of, uh, a legend, I was going to
say of Moroccan football but no, actually a football legend. Uh, we're at Mustapha Adji's. Mouss,
thank you. Well, thank you very much, I'm glad you appreciate it. Well, anyway, welcome,
you're home, you know. So, welcome to Morocco, welcome to Marrakech and the hinterland, because
we often talk about Marrakech, but not many people know about the hinterland
, but there are some truly magical places. Do you remember our
first meeting? Honestly, I'll be honest with you. No? Well, I'll
tell you about it, and there are some encounters. I was a young journalist a while ago
now. I'm not young at all. Uh, but uh, back in 2011, I was working for a
small channel called Se Foo, and I was making a documentary about African football. Yeah.
And thanks to your brother, You, who I knew from Ligue 1, I thought, "Okay, I'm doing a
thing on Moroccan football, and could you ask your older brother for two minutes?" I
just asked him one question for two minutes. It was in 2010, before the Africa Cup of Nations in 2011. Two minutes, please,
so I can ask him a question. We met, we were supposed to do a five-minute interview.
Yeah. We stayed a whole day because you showed me everything. You told me, "You're a young
journalist. If you need anything, come on, let's eat here." Did
n't you have a car? We were giving rides. It was so miserable. Oh no! And we talked about
football. Unbelievable. And at the end, I promise you, I don't remember what we talked about about football, but
I do remember one thing: I thought to myself, if he was classy, ​​yeah, considering what
he was as a player, I'm forbidden for the rest of my life to behave badly and
try to live up to how you behaved. I swear to you, my gift is the
crowd. I promise you, I promise you, no, there's one thing that's important. You know,
as a football player, I know we've gone through some very difficult times.
We, the children of migrants in France, so when you see a younger brother, it's sincerely
because of who I am. So why put him down? Why not make things easier for him
? I hope I've taken good care of everything. In any case, I thank you again
for that moment. Uh, Mousse, are you aware, not just for me,
but of the image you might have in football? I'm not talking about Moroccan football or
African football. Are you aware of that image? No, listen, I'm going to say
something that might sound crazy to some people, but actually, a football player, apart
from the titles, apart from the championships, all that you win at the end of a career? What do you
gain? People's love. That's what's worthless. So you can win all the
world championships, you can win all the World Cups, the Ballon d'Or, whatever you want, it's all
for nothing. If you don't have people's love, it's like you missed out. So for me,
I don't need to consider myself a football legend.
When I go out in Morocco or anywhere else, ordinary people stop me,
talk to me, and that's when I realize I've gained something. I consider myself
Like any other man. I've been luckier than others, and the doors have been
wider, more open for me than for others. But there are people who were bigger than
me in football and more talented than me. I believed in my potential because
I have to believe in my potential because I was raised in tough circumstances. The football
I knew isn't the football of today. So I had some very
difficult times. So mentally, morally... We're talking about life outside of football here. No, football,
the background of the training center, uh, life in general, but I was raised in tough circumstances. So
for me, I don't have a sense of myself. I know, I know that whatever happens, I'm going to make the effort and
I'm going to sacrifice myself. I'm going to commit to this. I know where I come from. I
know where I grew up. I know where I come from. I grew up here in Morocco. I was a shepherd.
I used to look after goats and sheep. I did that before I came to France. But it's a source of pride.
Of course, it's an honor. It's the oldest profession in the world. You know
that? Yes, but being a shepherd is an honor. It's an honor. Today, maybe we...
But it's the oldest profession in the world. You looked after all the prophets, they
were given shelter at the beginning. So there's no... there's no... to be given shelter. I was proud. Well, of
course. So when you were raised there, when you put on your first shoe, it was at
the age of 10 or 11 years old, your first shoe, from shoes to sandals, that you put on at 10 or 11
years old, you become a shepherd, you become a shepherd of France, their training is to not speak a word of French,
you see how it goes when it happens, it's extraordinary, that's why I told you, in fact, I have a life
where I have, where you have, where you must, I worked hard, where I always, I always had
to surpass myself in order to finally prove my talent or my dedication or whatever you want,
as you can call it, but I know that I had to surpass myself,
I had to do better than others, I had to work twice as hard because, and the
French language was complicated when you, because when you arrive, you don't speak French,
you don't know how to write or read, you didn't go to school before you were 10 years old.
You went to the mosque, I went to the mosque. I went to the mosque. We learned the Quran,
recited the Quran, but by heart. We didn't write it down, we didn't read it. So, French,
I arrived in France, I arrived in France, the French alphabet, Chinese. Even Arabic,
I didn't understand because I'm Berber by origin. So, uh, the alphabet, to
learn it, it took me two years just to pronounce it. That's why you're doing
well here, huh? That's why I'm doing well. I'm in the middle. When we look behind, and I
see the plateaus... That's it. We saw a shepherd on the way here. I assure you. It's true. The
shepherd is still there. Yeah. And when you see him, well, I know I was
like him, but I would never disrespect him, quite the opposite, I would be very honorable. I
greet him every day. You can ask my family, the people who pass by. I greet him
every day because it's not an easy job. You tell that to your children,
they know you were a shepherd. Well, my children know. Yeah. And honestly, it's
an honor, not a shame. I'm proud, on the contrary, I'm proud to have been one.
Of course, I'm proud to have been a shepherd, and I helped my grandmother wash a little horse. She
had a little cow, and yeah, of course. I washed the animals, I would take them to drink
because you had to go 15 km to find water, and we would take the animals back to drink and we
would take the animals back to eat. It was another life. And from there, you go to a training center.
That's why I told you, and then at the training center when you arrive, you arrive in a
Training center, and there it's war, it's not football anymore. At what age did you join the
training center? I dream about the training center, by the way. I salute Mr. Alin Perin. I
will thank him infinitely. It was Alin Perin who got you into the training center
in Nancy, who gave me this opportunity. Yeah. He's a coach of three clubs: Olympique
de Marseille, Olympique Lyonnais. An extraordinary soul. Honestly, you know,
in football, you can meet someone, your life can hinge on a few things, on meeting the
right person at the right time, and he was the right person. And I met Alin Perin, who did
n't know me, who came to a small, remote village in Lorraine, and he saw me play and
he said, "What are you doing here?" And I didn't even know how to answer him in French. Ah,
you didn't speak French yet? Barely 14 years old. I said, I said, but when I told my
dad, "I'm going to play football," my dad didn't understand, he's a minor. I said, "You're going to play
football." You say, "I'm going to play football." He said, "What are you talking about? You play football, but
you're going to play on Sunday? You say you're going to eat a merguez sausage, you're going to play your 1.5-hour match,
you're going home." I said, "No, I tried to play professional football." He
told me, "My boy, go to school, get a trade, maybe you'll end up a plumber," and
for him, that was already an extraordinary step forward. He told me, "Learn to speak French, how you
have to be integrated, to be able to look for a job, to get your vocational certificate if you succeed." So,
that's how it was. But then when I said I was going to play football, it was forbidden, out
of the question. So, you go in secret. Well, how did you manage to convince him? Well, I stole
a moped to go to Nancy. So, Cruzald, Cruz is on the border of the Jalon. No,
it's German. Cruvald has a forest in it. So, the border, up to the forest,
I don't know, I take a moped. You left on a moped? I left on a
moped. I left on a moped when I was 14 or 15. Yeah, 14. I borrowed it because
I didn't steal it. I borrowed it. Yeah, I stole it. I borrowed it, drove 150 km on
my moped, and it was overheating. I was going back to my friends' place who sold
American sandwiches. You know American sandwiches? The sandwiches? Yeah. American sandwiches. The
fried baguette. Baguette comes from "ach frite" (fried bread). There you go. Exactly. There you go. So I was going to my
friends' place who sold, uh, who sold all that stuff, and I was asking them to lend me a little something, 10 francs,
15 francs, 20 francs back then. 20 francs. It was nothing for gas. For
gas. Well, yeah, you have to get there, 150 km. Ah, I did something crazy. But anyway,
I get to the forest and then I do my little internship, it goes well with Almérin. And
at the training center, he tells me, "Here you go, you're in the training center." He gave me this
opportunity. For that, I will never forget his gesture and the kind person he is because he gave me the
chance of a lifetime, and I am very grateful to Mr. Perin. A short
break in this episode. Welcome to the production offices. I just wanted to talk to you about our
partner, MyHeritage, because the competition is approaching, and for some of you, it will be your
first time, perhaps in Morocco, or even, for some, in your country of origin.
So I wanted to tell you about MyHeritage, our partner for this episode. I set out
to find out if there was a professional footballer in my family. I wanted to know
if there was an Argentinian, you never know. Like Maradona's family or Pablo Aar's family,
if there was a connection with mine. On MyHeritage, you can create your family tree
. You can find your origins, of course, but not only that. It's a
very powerful tool . Over 36 billion pieces of information extracted from historical documents. You can
It's also important to know your family history or that of your ancestors. I can't even imagine
the family trees of the Turam, Maldini, or Zidane families.
By the way, tell me in the comments which family you think is the
greatest in the history of football. I realized we have 82 cousins
. I knew there were a lot of us, but not this many. The only problem
is that I still haven't found a professional footballer. It must be either a cruciate ligament injury or
simply the skill level. We love football, but we haven't managed to reach that level in the family.
While searching my family tree on MyHeritage, I didn't find any footballers. However
, I did discover that a great-great-uncle was a referee in his village of Rasselwed. I
learned this because MyHeritage cross-referenced the information in my family tree with
digitized press archives from the newspaper Le Mob àer, a newspaper that no longer exists. And
you can even get information just from a photo. Speaking of photos,
you can colorize them, but you can also, and more importantly, animate them,
bringing static images to life like videos. It's simply exceptional. By the way,
if you also want to learn more about yourself, your family, your history,
I suggest you sign up for MyHeritage and try it out. You get 14 free days with a
Premium account. You have the link in the description and in the pinned comment. Wait, I'll be right back
because you're coming home after. Yeah, but how do you tell your
dad that you're going to do the... No, but if you want to know, I have... Where do you sleep? And
yes, during the week when you're doing the internship, where do you sleep? There you go, there's a forest within the forest.
I'll hide the moped from you. I'll tell you all sorts of things, I sleep in the forest. Almérin is
wondering what he's doing. He comes and he's here before everyone else, he
's 150 km away. So the internship goes like this and then he realizes that
I come first, I leave last. You don't eat, you eat at the center at noon but the rest of the
time you just grab a small piece of bread, you put a little cheese on it,
you wait until evening, but it's -15 in the evening. If it's not you want to, Montpellier Anicien is
-50, always dressed the same way, red jogging pants. I had red jogging pants, red
plastic-coated jogging pants. I had a windbreaker like that and I lived, I arrived every day with the same thing. We
had shoes. I had some shoes that were practically indestructible. Yeah. Indestructible. They were
shoes. They weighed 2 kg. I won't say the name of the thing, but the brand, but they were leather. But
leather... Was the brand a first name? Ah, it was a first name, Patrick, right? What
are Patricks? No, but wait, don't... with the... with the... with the end of the... that went up. That's what it
went up like that, with little loops. You can only do that. You can only do that, stitched like that. And
the leather was thick like that. So that means you limited... it was dry, the shoes
were dry. You had to put them on a radiator for 3 days to dry them.
So when I played, they were wet, so I put newspaper inside. But you go
into the forest, you'll dry things out. So they were wet. Your feet were cold,
well, I won't go into detail, it's... it's... it's... it's amazing. And I had an exceptional experience, and
at the raincoat station, he came to help me up and said, "Well, you're going back to your parents' house, and then
I say, 'That's it, death!'" I said, "Don't you know the man who's at
my house?" I said, "He's 6'6", he's a miner, he weighs 308 lbs." I said, "He has hands like Robocop,
hands like this." I said, "But he's going to kill me." He said, "No, no, we'll go with you."
And then, when you explained it to him, it's a raincoat station employee who's telling the story, it's still... ask who...
My dad, a factory worker, met the other guy and started talking about football. He said, "What's that all about?
I don't care about your football!" He said, "No, but we'll pay you." He said, "Oh, well, let's talk about that
." He said, "Let's talk about that." "Ah, he said, 'pay,' he said, 'Let's talk about that.'" And then I explained a little bit
about how I was going to sign. At the time, I was 14 years old, I didn't even know, I was an aspirant, I think that
's what they called it back then. As an aspirant, you had the first year as an aspirant, then the second year as a trainee,
then a pro, and so on, you went up to that level because you couldn't sign a pro contract before the age of 18, before you were
of legal age. So there was a long way to go. And when I arrived at the
training center, like I said, it was war. So it was a real war. You were a
shepherd. Yeah, I was... you went... you walked miles to fill the water. You
did the moped, you did the forest, you did the shoes, Patrick. The
training center was nothing, in the end it was the easiest. Well, for me it was, well, I was, it was a good
war. I took it, I paraded it, I paraded it like a dessert. Nothing
could touch me. So afterwards there were, uh, there will always be, some inappropriate words.
There will always be injustices, but I had the deer and no worries. We talk a lot about
the emotions, the passion for football, for what we love, because in the end, and you're right, what
we remember about a player is the passion or an emotion they gave us at a certain moment. If you had to
choose a moment in your career, not where you experienced your greatest emotion, but where you think
you gave the greatest emotion to people, and maybe everyone fell in love
with you. When I was assistant to Herb Renard at the beginning with the national team, when
we went to see the national B teams, I often told them, "When you come for
the national team, and because of that, it will resonate with your question, when you choose your
country of origin and you choose the people who will love you, not just passively.
In fact, that's where you say, you'll reach people who truly love you." And I was
there, where I got my first selection with the national team, because people knew my
story with the French team, I knew that I had chosen Morocco, and it wasn't easy for
some people to choose the Moroccan national team in the 90s. Why doesn't he go to
France? But I knew where I was going. I love my country. Have you never asked yourself that question? I
never have. I've always dreamed of playing for the Moroccan national team. So that doesn't
mean I'm saying France is the only country I'm talking about. I'm grateful, of course, I'm grateful to
French football, to the club where I was trained, to the luck that gave me who I
am. I'll say that to France too. But where I brought more happiness than anything else
was when I played for the Moroccan national team. I brought happiness to the Moroccan fans, to the Moroccans who
share my blood, who have the same ties as me, the same traditions, and my life is Morocco.
So you can't make someone happier if they're a foreigner, someone who doesn't share your nationality or
blood. You can't make them happier. It wasn't just Moroccans you made happy
with the Moroccan team. That's why there's a particular moment in your career,
the 1998 World Cup. It was in '98 that I really discovered you. I was 15, 16 years old. Yeah.
And well, I'm thinking, that's why I was asking you, at what point do you think you made
people fall in love with you? Yeah, I... you know, Morocco qualified for the World Cup. Yeah,
and I grew up in a place where we watched national team matches with a lot
of interest. Algeria, not the 1998 World Cup. My neighbors, me, were Moroccan. It was
the grocery store next door. I imagine if they watch this video, they must be thinking how much
Memories of that World Cup are flooding back because we watched all the matches together
, and Morocco's matches in that competition were just incredible. And that's when I discovered you,
and that's when I thought, "Oh my god, I'm not Algerian." I must have thought
that. I don't want to tell you, but you know I was contacted about joining
the Algerian team. Yes, because my name is Adji. There are a lot of Algerians named Adji
too. So at the time, I couldn't change it. Back then, I got a call, and I was at the
SN Nancy Laoren (National Sports Institute), and an Algerian journalist called me. He said, "Listen, why
don't you choose your country?" I said, "Oh yeah, no, of course not." I said, "I've always had my country in
mind." She said, "Well, we'll contact you." I said, "But who's going to contact me?" He told me, "Okay,
I'm going to talk to the leaders of the Algerian national team." Ah, I said, "Well, I
'm sorry, I'm Moroccan." He said, "No, you're lying to me." I said, "No, no, it's the truth,
I'm Algerian." I know the name might be misleading, but I'm saying,
I'm Moroccan." At least we tried. Anyway, I grew up surrounded by
Algerians my whole life. That's why my wife is also of Algerian origin, so she's
Kabyle. So today, when people say Algerian, Moroccan, Tunisian, for me, there's
honestly no difference. This 1998 World Cup, I keep coming back to it because in the summers, the moments
when you were really enjoying yourself, you were talking about the emotions. Yeah. What was the highlight of that
World Cup for you? You were with Brazil, Scotland, and Norway. Yeah. In the
group stage. What do you think was the highlight of that competition for me? Well,
the highlight, actually, was just playing in France as a
Moroccan national. I grew up in France. You arrived in France at the age of 10 years old? At the age
of 10. So when I arrived in France, having already played in the World Cup,
just playing in one is magnificent, but playing in one in France is exceptional, extraordinary.
Even the first kickoff, you know, it's a dream, it's Morocco vs. Norway, the first match. Yeah,
Morocco vs. Norway, and Norway was the best team in Europe at that
time. I think they had played 13 or 14 matches without a loss in all
competitions. So we were playing against the biggest club, the biggest European country. So everyone
was betting on us losing. But Henry Michel, I think he did something
extraordinary. He's the coach of the team, and for him, I
was going back to France, I was going to play in the World Cup. So all of that played a part because most
of the players followed the league, followed the French national team. As As a Moroccan,
I've always followed the French team. So, I was going to a World Cup in France, Jacques Chirac,
as a friend and brother from Morocco. So, all of that was a joy for me. I played in front of my friends,
I played in my own backyard, actually. So, the biggest emotion, in fact, was when we
were training near Marseille. That's when we realized
the true magnitude of this World Cup. First match against Norway,
the score was 2-2, but I think we made some mistakes in that match. I think we made
mistakes, and everyone often runs into the goalkeeper, but it's a combination of things.
We should have won that match, and it might have been something exceptional,
but we made mistakes, perhaps. You lost against Brazil after that? Yeah, Brazil, anyway,
who would lose against Brazil? It was 3-0, 3-0, but At 3-0, it feels like we
missed out on the match. But if we look at the match itself, I think we developed
It was great football. We took too many risks because when you have a phenomenon, you have
players like Rivaldo, Roberto Carlos, Cafou, Dungona, and Bébéo, it's going to be 200 miles an hour, and we
wanted to play our own football, but against Brazil, you can't play your own football. You
conceded goals on the counter-attack. Imagine, against them, you were countered. That's it. While it
was them who should have been attacking, it was us who should have been countering, and in fact, we
played the wrong way around. But we actually enjoyed ourselves because, even though we lost 3-0, we didn't just
watch them play. For me, that's what it was, even after the match in the locker room. A lot of
disappointment because we expected to do something truly extraordinary against Brazil.
I think it was better to play that way because if we'd given them the ball,
maybe we wouldn't have played the third match the same way. Let's talk about the third match, just
with Brazil. Did you swap jerseys or not? Yes, I swapped jerseys. I swapped with Dunga.
You said you didn't, why Dunga? Because all the players were stealing Ronaldinho.
Ronaldo, Ronaldo the phenomenon. Everyone wanted Ronaldo, and some wanted
Bebebeto, and since I already knew Beto Rivaldo a little, I didn't want him because
he was the maestro for me. He was the guy who held down that midfield, who had
extraordinary class and was always one step ahead of everyone. While I was playing,
I watched his movement, his positioning. I say, but never, in fact, never, is he tired.
He's moved 2 meters, 3 meters, and he anticipates. So I said, these are the players
I like to talk about, it's not... it's funny, while we all think of... I could have mentioned all
the other players. Jeurais, said Rivaldo, Roberto Carlosfou, he's perhaps the one I would have mentioned
last, but Nonga because he was the captain and he deserved it. If he had
that armband, it wasn't for nothing, sincerely, because he held his own, he had class, and he
had a... I don't know, a charisma different from the other players. The phenomenon, we don't say... I'm
not even talking about the phenomenon because Ronaldo, Ronaldo, the phenomenon, let's not talk about it, but Nonga, he's the
foundation, he's the foundation of this Brazil. The last match is the one against Scotland. You
have to beat Scotland. We had to beat Scotland. And Brazil mustn't lose
against Norway. There you go. All we asked of them was not to lose. Uh, so we won.
Yeah. We won this match in style, and uh, and above all, I think that even 3-0 wasn't enough
. Finally, for us, psychologically, mentally, we could do it. Nathan H. Michel
said, "Come on, calm down, take it easy, there are matches to come," because for him, we were
already qualified 3-0, and we wanted more. We were playing beautiful football,
it was beautiful, it was the way we like it, and we had space, so we had everything in that
match. They're British. So we told ourselves, we know they're going to
struggle at the back. So we scored, by the way, behind the defender, and after that, it
was a match where we could enjoy ourselves and we
knew we were going to win it. But we knew beforehand because we watched videos,
we followed them, we knew some of the players, we watched them practically every weekend, so we
knew they had difficulties at the back, even up front, because they didn't have a great
center forward, unlike Norway. The waves, it was André Flo the Norwegians, yeah it's
a tour, it's a tour, it's a Manchester United team coming off the Champions League, they can't do anything, but
we knew we had every chance on our side to organize this match and we wanted to
win it in style and with a big score, and for us, yeah, fun, final whistle I
think, we have, I see Henry Michel, he comes and says, "That's it guys, we're there," yeah, because the
The match between Brazil and Norway isn't over yet, yeah, exactly. There's
Roger Pro, the physical trainer, who's running around and says, "Great, guys, you've done something
extraordinary!" So we said, "Okay, how much time is left?" Yeah, 30
seconds of a minute. It's Brazil. Brazil draws, so we're through. So,
while we're changing jerseys with the opposing players, the Scots, we see Michel
kicking, he's really going at him on the bench. I say, "What's happening to him?" And
then I see everyone's eyes, heads down. I say, "What's going on?" You
don't learn right away. No, we don't learn right away because we're caught up
in the emotion. And you never think Norway will beat Brazil. Well, no,
never. It's the only match they lost in the World Cup. You say, "No, that's it, Brazil, that's
it." But even, I said, even if they play 6 against the same team, even if they play 6 against Norway,
they won't lose. So, there you go, and you have this black veil that falls over you. It's...
and then you see nothing but black, you can't see the fans anymore, you can't see anyone. Honestly,
it's a penalty. It's Junior Bayano who pulls Thor André Flo's shirt. There you go. And you follow,
you see the penalty. Oh no, I was going to say it wasn't the phones, I don't know
why, I just said that, as if in '88 there were no phones to follow the match. You
follow it on the radio and you hear "penalty." We hear "penalty," but you know, it hasn't
been taken yet. It hasn't been taken, but with a penalty, you have a 90% chance of scoring. Unless you have
the pressure and you shoot it with your left foot. The goal is scored. The goal is
scored. You all know the goal is scored. And then Henry Michel, there he is, Henry
Michel, he goes around, he sees the players, but psychologically we were no longer in it. That's
it, you say, you've done something, because nobody saw us fighting to
qualify. They had put us last in the group, so nobody believed in us, and
well, it's total disappointment, but also for the fans because the stadium was full of
Moroccans. And then, you see, all that makes you say, at that moment, it's not just
the fans on the pitch. You think about your nation, you think about your family,
you think about your friends, you think about... In fact, you feel like you've failed in your mission
. It's true. You're not proud, thinking, no, no, you're not proud. You feel like
you have a mission. Yes, but everything says that everyone saw us at the bottom. There
's the disappointment of, "Yes, but that's for everyone."
You see yourself at the bottom, but for you, you who are there with the group, because it's a
family spirit, it's a family, and we believed, we didn't care what they said outside
the family, so even if they considered us losers, we believed them, we knew we could
do something exceptional, so we didn't even look at the rest, honestly, not even the
press, because it didn't interest us. All that interested us
was the week, the preparation, and the matches we were going to play, what was being
said before or what would be said after. We had a mission, we knew everything.
When you say "a whole generation" or "a community," you're not just talking about
Moroccans because you're part of it. But that's why I'm saying it calmly,
it's because we're in a period, Morocco in '98, but even a player like you... Yeah. Mustaphaji,
Zinedine Zidane. Yeah. Ali Benarbia for sure. Sabri Lamou... Sabri Lamou, there aren't many of us, there are only
four of us, and how many North Africans are there in France? There's Mous Saib, but he's from Algeria,
he plays... you know... It's not the same. No, it's not the same, it has nothing to do with... Yeah. No, there are
n't many North African players like we see today, where you can no longer identify with them.
To North African players today, when you're North African, but back then, yeah. Me,
I was born in '82, I'm telling you, I was 16 at the World Cup. We identified with
North African players. Of course. For example, in terms of playing style, like I mentioned, there weren't any awkward feet,
you know. There were only... We were talking about players, or real football players. But you see,
that's why when you talk about a generation, you're part of those players.
I'm going to speak for my generation, and those born from the late '70s to the mid-
'80s will understand. Uh, we identified with a few North African players.
Oh yeah, I tell them again, they weren't the clumsiest. You have to choose Zaji,
Benarbam Saï. No, but it's true, you already mentioned two players. Well, we don't talk about Zidane anymore because
Zidane is Zidane, he's Zidane, he'll always be Zidane, and even Zidane had difficulties like everyone
else. It wasn't that simple. And yes, Zidane, if you hadn't had the six years he spent at Bordeaux, I do
n't know if he would have been in the French national team and had the career he did. But,
uh, except for Zidane because he's in a category of his own, well, you're even saying that. Zidane
is phenomenal. As a person, sincerely, he's a good person.
And we can say Zidane has character, he's done things, a great shot, he's
on the field, he's... but as a person, I know, he's a good person. Football, well,
I'm not talking about football, I know, that's something else. But as a person, what he exudes, what he is,
bravo. I can only be a fan. And I've supported Zidane his entire career.
I was a player, but Zidane was my role model. You're from the same generation, he's '72. He
's '72. I'm a year older than him, maybe a year and a half older. But Zizou is a
source of pride, just like you. You see certain players who were your role models, well, who were
your role models. For me, Zidane was my role model. I was proud of him. I loved Zidane. He played for Juventus, I
know, Juventus. Zidane played for Bordeaux, I loved Bordeaux. Zidan was with L'Oréal. I supported him
because that's how it is, and that's how we grew up. It's our upbringing. And when you
see a brother like Zizou, well, you're obliged, you weren't obliged. It was automatic,
it was natural to support him. Like I said, Zidane left, he's a special case, but I've
seen some phenomenal players. Take Benarbia, for example, he's a phenomenon. Yeah. After Bordeaux
, he went on to Monaco, then Paris, so he helped everyone win league titles. It was
a film about Sabri Lamouché, who played in the second division for ATRE, I think, and then after that, after GXER, then Roma,
then Parma, Parma, Roma, I think, but Sabri was also an exception. He was an
exceptional player of Tunisian origin, but back then, we didn't have all those
opportunities. All the players of my generation didn't have that opportunity
to play football. They didn't all have an Alimpin, for example.
There weren't any at Impérial. That's why I'm telling you, I'm grateful, because these are exceptions.
And I saw talents of my generation, who are perhaps at Zidane's level, who didn't
make it because there wasn't an Alimpin who reached out. I have another question about your
father. Yes. Once you turned pro, once you played the matches you played, once you played for the
national team, he was proud when he came to watch you play, what would he say? Proud. Yes,
but he never came to watch a match. Not even the national team. Never, ever did he come
to see me play. Did he ever say anything to you? No, he's proud but he doesn't show it. But our
parents, and my father, he's 86, 87 years old now. She was too old, actually. He never
came to watch you play. No, he never came, actually. There's even one thing he didn't appreciate.
When I signed my first professional contract—well, financially speaking, my first professional contract was
n't exactly booming because in France, at Nancy, the salaries weren't exorbitant.
But when I went to Sporting Lisbon, when I signed with Sporting, when
I was transferred, I had a substantial salary that allowed me to tell my dad, "
You're going to stop working." So I went to see him, but I didn't go directly to him because, well, that's
how it is here, in our traditions, where the father feels like he
has to follow a protocol to even have the right to speak to him.
You have to send him a letter, you have to talk to his mother, try to negotiate. "Can I
sit down with my dad?" Talking to him is complicated, it's difficult. So I didn't go to see him, not out of
fear, but out of respect. So I see my mom, I tell my mom, I say we have to tell Dad
that's it, he's done working in the mine, that's enough for two minutes, that's it, you're finished. So, I
tell him his salary, I triple it, I quadruple it, I tell him to stay home. And my mom
says to me, "Yeah, my mom is happy, proud, she takes me, she kisses me, thank you my son, that's
all, it's good, his dad is tired, dad is tired." So I came back from Sporting,
I came from Lisbon, from Portugal, I came for what, four or two days of rest. So I had
signed, I came back. So I tell my father to stop. Oh, he didn't speak to me for six months. I thought
I was six months away. He took it badly. She took it badly. She said, "But how is that possible?" He's 22
years old, and what? How does he want to take care of me? He just didn't understand.
So for him, it was like he'd failed in his responsibility to his
family. So his son, he's above him, he earns, you know the mentality. Yeah, my son,
how can he earn more money than me? Who's going to pay me? Who's going to pay me? I stay home,
I don't do anything, nothing. No, he was ashamed, actually. It wasn't even that he was, he was
ashamed. He kept working. He kept working until when? I told him, I saw it
myself. I said, "Now you stop," because he was in the mine. Working in
the mine is one thing, but working deep down in the mine, putting
your life in danger, well, that's what really struck me. Why did I
tell him to stop working in the mine? I said, "Do something else." I said, "But you're making me
happy." But at the mine, my father... we went on a visit with a school
, back then. We went on a mine tour, and we went inside, and my father was
standing in front of me. I didn't recognize him because he was all black. Yeah, we said hello,
and I said hello to him, and I walked by. He grabbed my hair. He said, "
You're not your friend." I just did that. It was him, it was my
father, but I hadn't recognized him. Oh yeah. I could see his teeth, because with the... Oh yeah,
with the... with the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... that really struck me. It really struck me.
I said, "It's not possible. That's why we'll never be grateful... uh... we'll
never be satisfied with what we do for our parents because you can never give back what they
give you." And that's why, when I had the opportunity, I... uh... I said, "Yes, you're
going to stop working." But he continued, I think, for a year, until... until
I sat down with him. I told him, "Dad, you have to stop." I was, I'm asking you,
it's not that I'm saying "I'm not making an effort," I'm saying "I play a sport, I do it, it's a hobby."
I'm saying I do something, I play at the gym, I go to training, I enjoy myself,
on weekends we play a match, I say I earn a good living, thank God, and I said I want that
You see, you either benefit from it, and I want to thank you for what you've done for
me too, a little bit. She told me, "No, but it doesn't work like that." So it took time. But later
he accepted because his mother... and I told him, "Ah, and I told him today..." Plus,
he was working, working away from home, so he would leave for a month, come back for a
weekend, leave for a month; it was complicated. So I said, "Be there for my little brothers and
sister." I said, "We haven't seen you since I've been in France. I've maybe seen you
three or four times in six years. I said at some point, you have to be there for your children. So we
tried to manage things a bit like that, so that he would at least acknowledge that he
's absent too often, so that he accepted it, and his father... but on the other hand,
he's never, ever been to a football stadium, as far as I'm concerned, never. He went to see Youssouf,
maybe once or twice. What's your little brother who was a
Moroccan international, a top scorer, a legend of the game, who lives 100,
not even 100 km away? He never goes, maybe once or twice, but he doesn't like football.
He'll watch, but one thing's for sure: the Moroccan national team plays, he doesn't move, and
his children can play in the Champions League 50 km away against Milan, Barcelona, ​​whatever,
Froome, but by Against the national team, it's the national team. Look at that, it's something else.
Oh yes, he's standing there, it must be magnificent. There you go, go on. He wasn't at the stadium when
you scored against Scotland. No, no, they don't care at all. I thought it was him you
went to see. You remember the goal against Scotland, beyond the beautiful goal. Why did you
tell them to move aside, let me, wait, wait, they couldn't catch you? No, no, he was
crazy, but I had my friend, I wanted to see Ismaël Tricky. Okay. Because he was my
roommate. And he had just had a child the day before. Oh, great. So you see, he had just had
his child the day before, I think, or the day before, and he looks at me like this. He tells me, "I
feel good about you right now, you're going to score." Incredible. There you go, he tells me you're going to score. I say, well, listen,
I score, but it's not for You, it's for your son. And that's why you tell everyone,
to you, I tell him, I'm doing it this way, it's for you. You ran faster. Yeah, not just
to score the goal. Because afterwards it helps because I started off and it
happened like this, I came back and I sprinted towards Esma Tricky, uh, and then it's because
he believed in me, actually. Isma has always believed in me. Yeah. And uh, and when you arrive in the
Moroccan national team too, it's not easy, it's not obvious because you came out without being
Moroccan, uh, so we, uh, we trained too. So Ismaï was kind of like a big
brother to me, he protected me. He protects me, and so, uh, and that's also why since '93, '94, '93, '94,
we played in the '94 World Cup. Isma has always been He was, he was always there for me
, and he was already earning a good living. He was in a, he was older, so he spoiled me.
So, there you go, and when we went to the 1994 World Cup in the United States, he splurged a
bit. He bought me Jean-Franco Ferré suits, you know, he really spoiled me.
So, he was, actually, I go into a clothing store and there's
a beautiful three-piece Jean-Franco Ferré suit, even back then, with just one button. But he looks at me ,
I say, "I want one button," and I say, "Brother, I want one button, and don't bother, I want one button."
And the guy doesn't say $6,000. I get to the register and he says, "$6,000."
That was back then, it was... but no, $6,000 back then... the thing is, I was looking at it.
There are some dead people behind. He says "What's going on?" I said, "He didn't tell me in dirhams."
He told me $6,000. He said, he said, "But then I said, 'But I have $5,000,
that's six months of my salary in Nancy. Six months' salary.' I said, 'But what do I do?' He said,
'Well, I'll advance it to you.' I said, 'No, either you pay me, or you don't advance me anything at all. I'm
not paying you back.' So he really treated me. He paid for the Jean-Franc Ferré suit. Isma,
did you wear the suit much? Well, not very often because it got stolen.
That's true. You had it stolen. Yeah, I got stolen. But anyway, it's beautiful. It's
beautiful. But for that, KM, he was a gentleman." Which players did
you have the best connection with, both on and off the pitch? The
people you got along with best, or if you had to pick a few,
there were certainly several... Well, I won't go by club, maybe. Yeah,
maybe by club. At Nancy Laoren, it was Stéphane Capiot. I don't know if you know
Stéphane, Stéphane Capiot was phenomenal, he was a phenomenon. He's a great player, but unstable.
So, Stéphane is a very good friend, and then, when I went to Sporting Lisbon,
what was it? It was Martin who played with me. Lancé Laoren, what's his name? I think it's
Stéphane, I don't even remember his first name. Between you and Sporting, who was at Sporting and
we went through the youth academy together. Okay. Yeah, he went to Sporting. He met me
and then he joined me, I think after he joined me, I joined him, I don't remember. Then you
go to A Coruña. Then I go to A Coruña. Well, in A Coruña, I met several people. Well, then
there are two Moroccans who are there. Nordine Bê, there's Bassir, then there's Jean Sango, there's
Madar, there's Corentin Martin, there are a lot of Bonel players. Yeah, there's Bonissel, there are
quite a few players. So, and even beyond that, after the two Moroccans, the three Moroccans,
we were very close, but with the Moroccans there was respect, you see. You can't scare
Petfaille, he was the goalkeeper for Nigeria. Well, there you go. After that, I was closer to him because
I wanted to learn English. Okay. Like him, he barely spoke Spanish. So I was
often with him, and I was learning English and Nigerian. So I said, "Speak to me Congolese,
don't speak Spanish or try to speak French, only speak English." Great goalkeeper for the
Nigerian team in '94 and '98. No, he was a phenomenon. He passed away recently, but
he was a guy, yeah, that I really liked because he was genuine. He was genuine, and he was the third-choice
goalkeeper because there was Jacques Songo, there was the goalkeeper Teck, I can't remember
his name, it's Teck, what's his name, who made the handball on Birof's goal in '96,
I can't remember his name, but he made the blunder in the final of Euro '96 when he
shot on the turn, he tore it apart, a great guy, yeah, I can't remember his name, a monster, wait,
Stephan, no, I can't remember, Peter, Peter, he's also called Peter, Peter something. Okay, so, Jack
Sango. Taken from Jacques Sango. Who did you laugh with the most everywhere, huh?
Everywhere I went, I really liked Cachelou in Saint Cachelou, especially with the
national team, and with Aston Villa. Okay. Because we had David Gunola. Oh yeah,
we were actually a trio, there was David Gunola, Hassan Cachot, and me, and for us,
David was world-class, magnificent. Yeah, he's Jesus, we had some exceptional stories.
We're with David. So, I have to tell you this one because it's extraordinary, because
David, he's going to love it. It's... it's a voice. We're in a wine hotel in
Birmingham. And there's a wedding, and we're in the small lounge, having a little drink,
a little aperitif before sitting down to eat. And David, he always puts on, well, that's David,
that's why, well, he puts on, handsome guy. There, suit. There, his little jeans, sneakers and
There's the bride coming down. But the stairs, you see, they're enormous. It's like you have a
veranda like that and a big staircase like in Disney movies, like in movies, like in the mafia,
I know, in the movies, I said no, mafia, it's mafia because the guy, he was covered in tattoos,
his husband, a trucker's shirt, you know, short-sleeved, comes down like that, he's
a monster, he's wearing a tie, I say, but he's still going to get married like that. And the walk, oh
my god, horrible, horrible, horrible, and the bride, she goes down, she gets him in the swagger, and she sees David Ginola. Mad, but
what did she do? She just rolled around like that, she did somersaults, yeah, she
fell, she's all the way down, the groom who picks her up, what the fuck, it all went haywire, it all went
haywire, he wanted to kill her, he had it, and David, he saw, I said, David, don't go, you saw the monster there?
He's going, I said, he's going to hit you. I said, stay there, stay there. David, gentleman, he's going to pick her up, what's-his-name?
Sorry, sorry, what happened, wedding, get him to lift you up too. Exceptional. I laughed with
David because we had some moments, well, I said David as a player was
exceptional, and then we didn't know him. But David, when you know him, he's extraordinary.
It's a laugh from morning till night. Yeah, Char, that's it, that's it, it goes off every day.
Every day we laugh, honestly, we have a great time, from morning till night, during training,
outside of training, in the evening at dinner. We had some
extraordinary times with David and Hassan Cachol. Those were good times. And the best? The best. The best
because you've played with so many players. I'm not talking about those you've played against, but those
you've played with. With whom I've played. I have a list in my head. But if I had to pick the one I
played with, I'd say Jalmin, the first one that comes to mind. I'm happy. Jalma. Jalmin is
his nickname. He's Ronaldo, he's Ronaldinho, he's Neymar, he's Robinho all at the same time. He's
done everything possible and impossible in football, he'll do it to you. He's
extraordinary. But you have to know how to handle him because he's unmanageable and has a bad temper.
No, no, not bad. Brazilians aren't bad. It's very rare to find a mean Brazilian.
What surprised me one day was when I went to pick him up. He was at the hotel with me, and
he said, "Laê lagne, we have A Coruña." I went to his room to get him,
and he was already late, so I woke him up. I said, "Dialement is going to be late." He said,
"Don't worry, I do what I want. I'm the boss. Go ahead, he was the boss,
that's fine. There's no fine anyway." So, at the first gas station, he told me, "Stop,"
and I said, "I'll get you a quick coffee." He said, "No,
you're getting me a six-pack." And I said, "It's 8 a.m., what the hell?" He said,
"Perse at 8 a.m., du bia." At 8 a.m., I said, "He's not crazy." And the choros, you tell me,
you have the beer and the choros. He only ate that for breakfast, man, breakfast, while you're with
your coffee and you don't even dare eat a croissant because you say, "I'll throw it up,
I'll feel sick." Him, the roses, beer, you say, "But he's going to die." He goes onto the
field, you say, "Are the movements he makes on the back of his foot... and is he drunk?"
He's got guts and he did what he wanted, did what he wanted, so when he
decided in a match to make a deflection, it's the same as Ronaldinho. He decides when he wants
to play. He makes it, he's the one who chooses. He's the one who chooses his matches. Did you see him do crazy dribbles
? What's a drip? So go on YouTube, you can go. You type "best of
Jminia," it's fine. There's the rainbow up there. There's the "p" of the scarf, the little bridges,
the... What's the craziest dribble you've seen from Jalminia? Jalminia did the double
touch, left foot then right foot. That means he started outside with his left foot, uh, there you go.
Left foot, like that, inside, he brings it back. The player comes, he does it again, outside right foot,
inside right foot. He went tap tap tap tap. Comma, comma. Yeah, comma, comma. But it's
both feet, he went tap tap, but he's going 200 miles an hour. The players left like that.
One went to Warzat, the other went to Dublin and is still running after the
mountain. Yeah. No, and I have, I have, but at a speed, but I'm telling you, but ankles,
hips, and him too, he has the gravity of marked people, he has, he has arms a
bit, you think, but how does he play football? He has no coordination
, his body isn't coordinated. It's like you have one arm like this, the other one runs like this, a
bit crazy, but I've seen players, I've seen the Phenomenon, I've seen Ronaldinho, I've seen Zidane, I've
seen Maradona, but him stronger, well, no, he's the one who's the most impressed.
Yeah, that's what it is, and the speed of execution, that's what's impressive.
It's the speed of execution, it's impressive. Then yes, of course, we played against the Phenomenon,
yeah, those are the players you played against, it's Ronaldo, the Brazilian. Ronaldo, Ronaldo,
he's extraordinary. For me, he's the best player of all time, ahead of
Diego. Ahead of Diego, I played against Diego too. And I'd put Diego right after. Okay. And I
'd put Ronaldinho and Zidane. Okay. Those are the four. And if I had to put a fifth, I'd put Iniesta.
Because the top five, well, for me, then everyone else is a mixed bag. Diego, the phenomenon, I
had the chance—and I mean the chance—to play against him. He's an artist, he's art,
it's not just football, it's art. You get to play, or you just watch for a while what he does,
or he's the only player. Honestly, I've watched players, I've played against 10
players, but the only player I've watched, the one I stopped to watch,
is Diego. You watched him play? Ah, I watched him play. It's a pleasure.
It's like going to play tennis. You play, you watch, you watch Fire play.
Yeah. You become a spectator. You become a spectator. You watch. It's Diego.
And then he has charisma, it's extraordinary. And then he was smiling, he was all smiles. No,
he spoke to you during the match. Yeah. No, I told him, I told him, I told him, you
're exceptional. I sincerely told him, you're exceptional. And I didn't know, it was when I
played against him in '93. Okay. A match with the national team in '93. We played in Argentina. We
played in Argentina, and then I took the plane with him back to Spain because he was
in Valencia or Seville. Yeah, yeah. I went back to Spain to then go back to Paris, but he came
with us on the plane, it was amazing. Even during the match, I was watching those
players, you have to watch them play. You were watching them play, you're 22 years old. Uh, at the time
you had just signed a professional contract not too long ago because you don't join the professional team
until you're 18. And then you play for the national team, you get a chance, and then you play
against the best player in the world, almost the best player, Ronaldo, the phenomenon of all
time. So you played against Ronaldo a lot, too. Yeah, Ronaldo with Morocco. And
then you played with him when he was at Barça and you were in Spain. Zidane too, because
Zidane came later when you were at Espanyol. Zidane, that was when you were playing. Yeah, then yeah,
I played against him, he played in Madrid too, I played against him at Barça, and I played, but at
Barça he was Ronaldo. Yeah, Ronaldo at Barça, yeah, yeah, of course. Then at the end,
I think he had a lot of muscle problems when he arrived at Real Madrid where there
were the Galacticos. But when he was at Barcelona, ​​my god! But no,
Can you imagine playing with a guy like him? No, but yeah, it's easy, right?
You pass the ball and I say, "Wait, we have a problem," we give you the ball and you... no,
you just watch him play. Me, I'm a defender, honestly, when you're a defender, that's why
all those artists don't exist anymore. It's difficult for those players,
with all due respect, with all these great players today, but players
with that talent, with that genius, don't exist anymore. Hmm. And today, most players
today are athletes. Before being footballers, they're athletes. You experienced
the transition from the 90s to the 2010s, to the end of the 2000s,
practically to the end of 2012. So yeah, I've seen the evolution, and that's why I always say, that's
why I always say today, the mind is more important than the footballer. When
you're an athlete today, you have a better chance of succeeding in top-level football. But
when you're a bit of an artist, or you just like that, it's rare. It's rare. Today,
to be a really new player, you have to have a
minimum level of athleticism, a minimum level of intensity, and then, uh, there's no more... there's no more of that magic. I
don't know, apart from a few exceptions, they're very rare. But personally, which
players do you enjoy today? There aren't many, are there? Yeah. You sit down and
think, "Yeah, I'm happy, I'm going to watch a good match." You say, "Yeah, I'll
see, yeah, maybe if I watch a player I really like to play today, it's maybe
at Barça, not the minimum because we've seen players like that before. But a player a
bit like Niesta, like, you know, in the spirit of Niesta, and the class, the vision
of the game, the ball control. So it would be more like Pedri for you. For me, today it's Pedri. I like
to play him because he reminds me a little bit of the Barcelona style of play from the time of
Niesta and Chavi, who play forward and press. You get the impression
that he never gets ahead and you always get the impression that he's going to be on time, but he takes
the balance without making a mistake. Ah, players like that, for me, they want
everything before everyone else. The anticipation is there, and then despite his small size he He's there,
he's standing, he's on his feet. But after that, it's very rare to see... There's also Vetinia, who's
quite good, Vetinia, whom I like a lot because he's Paris Saint-Germain, where he is, he
's Doc Vinia, you know? Well, there's Hakimi, of course. He's our
star. He's even beyond that, he's very proud of himself. And Vitinard, Vitinard today,
even if he's not at Paris Saint-Germain in the middle, he's still the one who makes the most of the good weather
there. When you see Kimi and the Moroccan team today, what it's become, yeah.
What's your take on it? Especially since you've lived through the metamorphosis, you've lived through the beginning of the
project that was put in place. It's funny because I really emphasize this, and we
really emphasize this. It's It's not by chance, it's not a great generation of Moroccan players. It's
Moroccan football that positioned itself to create generations. It's a real project
that was put in place. Of course, it started after 2004; there was a break after the
Africa Cup of Nations final in Tunisia. Tunisia lost to Tunisia. Yeah. I think there
was a bit of a break after that because there were practically no more Africa Cup of Nations qualifications
, there were no more. But King Mohammed VI, he saw it, he has an
exceptional vision because today, if we experience what we want in Moroccan football, we
owe it to His Majesty, we don't owe it to anyone else. Why? Because right from the start he
It was an academy, okay? He's creating an academy in Matis, creating a Mohamatis academy, what's the point?
But the Mohamatis academy is starting to train players, starting to change mentalities
, to be able to invest in training. You understand, before we didn't think about training,
that's the big change in mentality. Tell me, tell me, I'm going to ask you a question:
before, did Algeria have U15s in the national B team, all U17s, did
they have U19s? We only had one team, maybe the younger ones, the Olympic Games. That's it,
because you had to have it. But today, you have all the categories, and in
all categories, Morocco shines. Yeah, but before there weren't any categories. When
you tell me about the 80s and 90s, I knew about the Moroccan national team and the Olympic Games, like the 23rd.
The youth teams, the youth teams, everything else... there wasn't the 15th, the 17th, or the
19th, nothing, it didn't exist. But today, with this mentality, they started to focus on
training, and then His Majesty invested in the infrastructure, he provided the resources. What's
the center like? The technical center, the center... I'm not saying it's the Clairfontaine of Morocco anymore,
since it's not Clafontaine anymore, the benchmark is perhaps the technical center of Moroccan football
. Yeah. It's becoming a benchmark. In fact, you have to go on vacation there. It's true. Tell me about it. I
've never been. Tell me about it. Me, I... well, I'm lucky to live there.
That's why, actually, I used to live there. Yeah. I lived at the center for almost four years, three years
with Hervé and three years with Vaid. I've had my own room for six years now. I had my own room, but I wanted
to bring my family with me. You have a hotel, a five-star hotel, Olympic-sized swimming pools,
football pitches, a tennis court, a course in this,
a course in that, a medical center, restaurants everywhere, cryotherapy, scanners,
a dentist—a dentist inside.
My son, my son, he's at the center over there in Marmora, it's called Matis,
he was getting his teeth treated. He's 13 years old, he was at the center there. Well, they
stopped the program. Too bad. But the 13-year-olds, they lived there. Well, my son
was telling me, "I'm doing creotherapy at 13." At 13. He told me, "I'm going back for
recovery." He said, "We had scans done to see if we have any problems. He's going
to the dentist." Actually, I get the impression that you're talking about a training center,
a top-level club, a club of champions. It's not just top-level, it's beyond imagination.
I'm telling you sincerely, and you'll find the key to this. This center
is the symbol of this project. But it's not just that. But from the moment you do it,
you create, you lay the foundations for a project that His Majesty has created, okay? And when you put
the right people in place, train the right people, and bring in added expertise
, and provide training for Moroccans to help them develop
, Moroccans have learned about training in Morocco. So, His Majesty
had all of that at the same time, while we only had the center, we only had the academy, even though
all of this had been well planned beforehand. So, we brought in expertise that
adds value to all the Moroccan talent because there's so much talent. There's an enormous amount
of talent when you go to the beaches in Morocco. You go to the fields near
here, kids playing on rocks and everything, they do crazy things. They're
good. That's talent. It's a bit like the Brazilians. They play football everywhere.
And when you hire the right people to provide training, because
before we only had coaches, you shouldn't confuse things because we've always had the
I've always felt that people confuse coaches and trainers. It's not the same job.
They don't do the same job at all. When you're a coach, it's easy, right? When you're up there,
you're a coach. The guys have already taken their place, it's like a kind of control. You manage them,
you coach, you manage, you manage the person. But here, you train, you do training. It's
completely different. They are completely different jobs. Today,
if you tell me you do training, I say I'm way behind the scenes and I don't understand
anything. I can't manage a 15-year-old. I swear, not a 13-year-old, a 14-year-old,
a 15-year-old. How do you manage an adult? It's easier to manage someone who's come in, who's
done everything, the age groups that come in. Ready, you put it in? Oh, you're not good, I have another one. That's
easy. When you're the coach, it's easy. Your whole problem is managing. Doing your tactical work,
how to manage your group? But do some training. Learn it. Learn how to
train. Train a 13-year-old, shut down a kid, train a 10-year-old. They're the ones who
should benefit from all this. I'm telling you honestly, I can't understand
how a youth coach gets €2,000 a month and a top-level coach gets
€4 million a month or €3 million. If I have to invest today,
I have to invest in youth coaches because that's who I'm going to win with. Do you understand what
I mean? Simon, that's how I see football. That's why the person who
trains a kid from 8 years old until 16 or 17, that's where I invest because that's
where I'll get my money. But it might cost less than buying an 18-year-old. There you go. And
that's why today, training... And that's why in Morocco we understood that learning, having
training, having top-level coaches, well, that can only lead to
the U20s who won the World Cup. Can you imagine if you had all these resources a
few years ago? We're not going to rewrite history, but it would have changed things.
Oh, certainly. But it wouldn't have been the same pleasure. The authenticity you had,
the struggles, what was the biggest struggle you had? I know some
about the Algerian team, but I don't know any about the Moroccan team. No. What were
the trips like? Because when you travel to the African continent, well, for everyone,
it's tough, well, less so now than before. Coach, you've had some tough times. No, but the
national team, the national team deserves all the sacrifices you can make in
your life. Yes. So when you arrive, we laugh about it because it's enjoyable. Well,
you arrive, even back in the '90s, we paid for our own tickets. You pay for your ticket, you
're a Nancy fan. Yeah. No. Come on, you're at the Coronation. I'm at Sporting. You're at Sporting? Yeah. I
buy my plane ticket because the national team sent me the ticket. There you go. You
're selected. There's your selection, you have to be there on such and such a day. You buy your ticket,
are you going to reimburse it or not? That's another problem. Normally they should reimburse you.
Normally they reimburse you. Did you get all the expenses reimbursed? Yeah, that's not
a problem. That's me, like I told you, the selection process is worth all the sacrifices. After
you arrive, whether you get paid or not, that's not the point. But to go through that hassle again,
going to Africa, and then you're going to play in Guinea and the bus catches fire and the driver
runs away. The driver doesn't, he just runs away. The fire, the fire comes out of the engine. There
were flames. The guy takes the thing here, he left us the card and we were supposed to play
at 3 PM. What time was it? It was 1:30 PM. Oh yeah. So what do you do then? Oh, you
manage. How? You take your bag, you flag down the passing taxis, the guy on the moped
Whoever's passing by, you get on the motorcycle and you go to the stadium. Did you all arrive at the stadium? Guys
arrive by taxi, there are two or three of them in a taxi, then you have the little Toyotas, you
know, with the... well, behind you have 45... and you have the guy with the sheep, the thing, and you go to play, it's
magnificent. And what did you do in that match? We won, I even scored two goals, I
think. You won, I missed a penalty. I missed the first penalty. I scored two goals after.
Yeah, I think so. We won, we won 2-1. Plus, there was Titi Kamara with Guinea. Oh yeah,
with Guinea, they make us play at 2:30 or 3:00, I think. He was doing something... You're not even
warmed up. Well, nothing. You arrive, you arrive, there are... there are... Well, no,
there are... sometimes, what do we call them? The... There were guards on the pitch.
But they made us play on a dirt pitch. A dirt pitch. There's no grass.
We get there. They wanted to destroy us, and we succeeded. And I told you, you were hitting,
hitting, hitting the ball, you couldn't see it because there was some dust for two
or three seconds, you had this dust, this earth and dust, so you couldn't see the ball.
It was extraordinary. What's the craziest pitch you've ever played on? Ghana. Oh yeah. Oh
Ghana. Why? They had an amazing team in Bujumbura. Oh yeah. And so we had to go
there to play in the 1998 World Cup qualifiers. And I promise you, did you see the pitch
there? Yeah, it's Wembley. So there, the pitch there, you see, it's better than the pitch in Ghana.
Yeah, yeah. No, I'm going to show you the footage because, well, I'm telling you, I'm showing you the
footage. The ball, you pass it there, you make an inside pass 2 or 3 meters out, the ball goes up and
then suddenly, it goes up, it goes up immediately. You look, but what's happening? No
grass. And you have the team opposite, you don't have any weaklings, you have some real pros, some guys, or I do
n't know, the other guy plays, I don't remember all the names, but you have the guys who played
for Bayern Munich at Leeds United, uh, we had a headache, we had a headache, and then they were
monsters, they were athletic, when you see the guy, they come in, you say, 'We're going to have
a rough fifteen minutes,' they won, 2-0. We won 2-0. There were, I think, 5
minutes left to play, and we were defending, so we were clearing the ball. It came in, bam! Headbutts
! We were sending it flying from the stands, the stadium was full, the stadium was packed, people came to the touchline,
the touchline was full, there were people there, the ball never went out,
it was always given back, it was always given back, there were 80,000 ball boys. Listen, listen,
we played 108 minutes, I think, 108.8 minutes, back then it was 90 minutes. They won, he gives them a shot,
okay sir, it's good, we won. The referee, I think it's in the corner, we go to see him, he says,
but the referee, it's been 100 minutes, it's 80, 100 minutes, oh no, he has to, he says, they have
to equalize. I say, but how do they have to, they have to equalize. And you see all the players
of the national team, you ask them, they say, but they have to, and Henry, Michel, he Henry's plans are ruined
. He has to score. Tell me what? He told me the referee said he has to score or we're
not leaving the stadium. I promise you. On my children's lives. Did he score or not? Well, we
let them, they scored in the 100th, 108th, or 109th minute. They scored, and the referee... they scored
, the ball went in, he blew his whistle, he ran. We don't know where he was. We wanted to greet him. No,
he ran into the locker room, extraordinary. The World Cup. Yeah. The... Yeah. And then
they came to... we played the return match in Casablanca and we won 1-0 and we went
to the World Cup. But it was the benchmark match, Africa, exceptional. The stadium, but it went crazy,
people everywhere, people were everywhere there was a post, they were
hanging on, they were like that the whole match. The stadium, I, I have never seen anything like it. You have to have
A strong character is needed to play this kind of match. In Africa, it's like I've always said,
I say when you know you're coming to play in Africa, if you don't come as a soldier, stay
home. Hm. Go play golf, go play tennis, don't come to the national team. That's it. Don't come
to the national team. In Africa, you come as a soldier, you don't come as a player. Well,
I'm talking about myself back then. Today, the conditions are better. You see the pitches
today, so the last Africa Cup of Nations, the pitches were magnificent in Ivory Coast. There
in Morocco, Cameroon, in Egypt. In Egypt, I played in the one in Egypt, it was extraordinary.
In 2019, I won, I don't remember. Yeah. My Algerian friends, brothers, Algerian brothers,
congratulations. They deserved it, didn't they? And what's more, yeah, they deserved it. Of course, they
deserved it. When you see the infrastructure today... Yeah. No, well, today is
better, but it can only evolve. Today, you can't have
mediocre infrastructure and expect to have beautiful football. It's not compatible. So, if you want
to have beautiful football, and also because today the African player is the
benchmark in the world and they are complete players, if you don't give them the conditions to
express themselves, you can't have good African Cups, you can't have good
matches in Africa. So, automatically, everything is connected. The place of African football
is changing. Morocco has recently changed the place of African football. It's the nation that has
changed the status of African football. Players like Ashraf Hakimi today, like Mossala a
few years ago, like Ran Marz a few years ago with Leicester when he was the best player
in the English league when he played for Manchester City before Didier Drogba, there's Touré.
African players have changed the status of this football. Do you feel
an African team is capable of finally winning a World Cup? Morocco lost in the semi-finals,
but you see, it was the first time an African team had reached the
World Cup semi-finals. Yeah. With the infrastructure, with the mentality, with the centers and training
like we have in Morocco. Do you think that
African football is currently the best equipped, or perhaps now there are the arguments
for it because it's not by chance when you win a cup? Nobody wins a World Cup by
chance. No. Today, Africa still lacks something, I think. What? Does the
gaze of others still weigh on African football? You experienced that? No, but it's not about
the African footballer, it's about the African footballer. No, it's not about football, it's not about others,
it's about you first. It's about us Africans. First, it starts with the federations. Then,
it's about the player. The African player isn't disciplined as he should be.
The African player has to tell himself that at a certain point, when he reaches a certain level,
when he's an international player, he has to be exemplary and he has to stay. If
you're not building a short-term career, you're building a long-term career. First of all, you
have to tell yourself that when I enter the professional world, I have to be at the highest level
for 10, 12, 13 years, easily. How long did you last? I played
professionally. Uh, I stopped playing professionally maybe at 38. Yeah. But
at what age did you start? I started at 17. 16 and a half, I think. 16 and a half, 17. So
you have 17 years of professional career. But that's what makes it possible, because you have a healthy lifestyle,
you have stability in terms of family, competitive, excuse me, 21, not competitive, 21? 20.
Come on, let's say 20, we're not going to go back to 20. But then, I think that the African player
, the African player, you have to please, I don't know, there's something that
The problem for me with African players is that you have to consider yourself like everyone else. You have to stop
thinking there's a difference between African players. Today,
you are the best. Honestly, African players are the best. They are
the most complete players from the start. And when you see players like Sadi Mané, you mentioned Sadi Mané,
MZ, and Mosala, he played at a very high level for a very long time, but it's players like
him who should be considered role models. And yes, Drogba, if you had
n't been African, would you have had a different career? It's not about playing the victim. Look,
there's no complaining here, it's just about explaining football as it was, as
it might still be. Would you have had a different career if you had been
Argentinian or Brazilian? If you played in the 1998 World Cup, and you played like you did
at Deportivo La Coruña, Aston Villa, Espanyol, and Coventry, wouldn't you have had a different
career if you had been Argentinian or Brazilian? Well, if you want me to be honest, even before
I left Nancy and Rennes, I saw discrimination. I experienced it 1000
%. In Nancy. In Nancy. What struck you, for example? No, but listen, even in Nancy, even though
I love SNOREN, I'm Laence Laoren's number one supporter, he gave me everything, but there's one
match that really stands out for me, a match that really stands out for me. We played against Marseille, against Marseille, we did it
because we were both on the same team, and at the time we were playing, we were playing, we were playing for the Ligue 2 title
against Olympique de Marseille, who had just been relegated after the MVA scandals, Tony Cascarino, Marcelo.
Bartz was in goal and everything. They had an amazing team and we were playing against them.
We were there, we were playing for the top spots and we were hosting Marseille at home.
I scored a brace and I shouldn't have noticed anything about the brace because I know how, for that
reason, I'm telling you this. I came in and I did the work all by myself because I wasn't supposed to
score. I'm a winger, I'm here, I'm here to... Back then, you had to beat
your man, cross, left foot, right foot, and I was lucky, I was good with both feet. So the coach
could make me play on the right or the left, and at some point, I was able to meet his
demands. So he made me play on the left, which was complicated at the time. So I would cross with my
left foot, I would take free kicks and corners with my left foot. We had more players back
then who were right-footed on the right, left-footed on the left. You get past them and you... There you go. But
back then, I took corners with my left foot, and yeah, I... Well, yeah, it was even free kicks that
happened to me, and actually, why am I saying that? Because that match had really stuck with me because the coach...
I had already had a season the year before that was very satisfying for me,
but it didn't please some people. And the following year, I played
against Marseille. I knew that at one point I was going to leave because things weren't going well, and then I
scored a brace against Marseille. We were winning 2-0. There were a few minutes left to play.
I had Tarazevic, I don't know if you remember him, the tall Ukrainian, the Russian at the time, he played
a long ball. I was in the corner of the penalty area, the 16-meter line as we say now. The 16-meter line.
And then, I hit it hard. But I sent the ball out of the stands, I mean, towards the
fire station. Oh, you hit it hard and it went very far. Gone, gone. But on the other hand,
I had scored two extraordinary goals. I had played an exceptional match. An exceptional match
for me. It was like, "I beat Marseille, I did it all by myself, and I know that, and the ball there,
I put it there, and there, I had the whole stadium, oh, the whole stadium went wild." I scored a brace at home,
we're playing Marseille. You miss and you get booed. I scored two goals. There you go, there are 2 or 3 minutes left.
I wanted to have some fun. I said, if I put it in, I'll be playing for Barça. If
I miss, I've scored, no problem. And I try, I take a
volley, I put it over there. I don't know, it went into the Moselle,
the Moselle, it went there. So, and then, the whole stadium, they killed me.
So, I heard you, huh? Don't talk about my parents, I'm talking about my rage, everything.
I heard everything. Your parents, go home, go home. Form there. Yeah. But
what is it? After the match, I go out to the club because we won, we won 2-0.
I score two braces, I score the brace, and then you miss a volley. Sure,
it's... Yeah. Sure, you miss, you miss. I even wanted to insult myself, but
hearing things like that, I said, "That's when I understood." I said racist insults,
did you feel them? Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. You say, "Go back home, uh, to your village,"
I go back, and I say, "But what is this?" And all the... all the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the...
the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... the... that... they... they... they... they... they... finished me off, and that was it, that was the end of the season. It was the end, but we
were going up, we were... we were... we were... we were... we were... we were... we were... we were
going back up to the first division, and that's when... that's when I... I have to leave France.
It was that match, that match, where I... where there was a turning point. I said, it was in '94, '95. I said, "
I have to leave." I said I had to leave, and I promise you, from that day on, I said
I'd never set foot in the French league again. But it shocked me. For
me, it's like a family, you know? Yeah, it was like being your own fans. Yeah, that guy, Choudran.
I loved him. Yeah, well, I still wear it, but he didn't do anything to me. The club didn't
do anything to me, but the people who were there, they killed me, they destroyed me, and mentally,
it was over. I saw the club president. I said, "President, I'm not staying at your club,
it's impossible." He said, "No, again." I said, "I'm not staying, it's impossible." He said,
"Yes, but we can sell you to Nantes." I said, "I don't want to stay in France. I said, 'I don't want
to stay in France anymore.' I said, 'Everywhere I went in France, I was massacred.'" In Valenciennes, they killed me.
In Valence, they drew me. In Laval, they destroyed me. Oh yeah, I go to Corsica and it's even worse. I say
I'm going to play in Nice, it's the same. I'm going to play in Valence, it's the same. In Valenciennes,
it wasn't just teasing, it wasn't racist insults. Oh, but today
, it's impossible. You see, you know, nowadays people can't
afford things like that, but before, before, it wasn't just one person, it wasn't just
the two of us, it was a whole bunch of people. It's not about getting angry or hurting yourself,
it's about hurting me. It doesn't make me angry, I don't get angry, it doesn't help me, but it
hurt me deep down because I considered myself like the old-timer. Getting slammed
by the opposing fans, you're still there, but your fans, you
play for them, you say, I am one of them, and getting slapped around
like that every weekend, every other weekend, because you played every other weekend, you have
pressure, you play twice away, so yes, and then, like I told you, yes, certainly
the injustice is difficult. It's difficult because at one point
I could have... Yeah. I could have had... I had choices. Which club could you have signed with,
but it didn't happen in the end? No, because you're North African or Muslim,
of course that plays a part. I could have gone to play for Milan. I could have gone to... Yes, Milan, it was
practically... Why didn't you sign for Milan? Milan, uh, because... and I'm telling you honestly,
I got a call from Boban. Bob, number 10, Croatian, he was the playmaker for AC Milan in the
mid-90s, late 90s, a semi-finalist with Croatia in '98. He calls you, he calls me,
a great player, but he was a player, not a coach. Yeah, a great player, he calls you,
why a great player, a great man? Well, I already knew him as a player, I played against him,
and a phenomenon, a phenomenon, one of the best players in the world. Anyway, I'm
in A Coruña, he calls me, he says, "Listen, there's Melan,
they might want to replace me because I'm starting to get tired. And I offered you my services."
Did he give your name? Yeah, he gave me my name. She said, "Is that you?" They asked me, and
I gave it to her, I said, "Mustapha, he would be the player who best fits your needs
at Milan." At Milan. Boban. And he calls me, and I say, "He's joking, it's April 1st." I
checked the month, I made sure it wasn't an April Fool's joke, a trick. And no,
it's fine. So, well, Deportivo La Coruña was difficult for me because they
had a stubborn president and complicated management. So they were the ones choosing the
club, and I couldn't leave there as I wanted and go wherever I wanted
because I had some great opportunities. But how could he refuse? Paris-Germain,
I had Marseille. You could have signed for PSG at that time in Deportivo, at the end of the
Ronaldinho era, and they wanted to put me with them. There was also Marseille when Robert was there, there
was Robert, there was... what's his name? Pz yeah Ravanelli Dug it's the year
they went to the UFA Cup final 99 with the beautiful gold jersey there you go and the coach it's uh
the coach what's his name bis Corbis Roland Corbis it was his son who came
to see me at the Corona who asked me who asked me we talked I said yeah of course I said
Marseille would you have liked to sign for Marseille well Marseille Marseille Marseille ah you would have
gone back to France well Marseille Yes, I'm from Marseille, it's true for OM. No, not me,
I'm not into But actually, the clubs I support are clubs that made me a fan of a
particular club. Hm. When you're young, there's Marseille, of course, with the great
Marseille with Bernard Tapie, then you have AC Milan with Berlusconi, Berlusconi's team with Van Bastien,
Guillot, Richcard, Maldini, Barisier, and so on. And then you have Barça and Real Madrid, which I loved when
there were certain players, when there was Zidane, like I told you, Real Madrid, I watched
because I love Zidane. You wanted to see Zidane? Well, that's normal. So, even you, you
were watching Barça, even a player of your own caliber, you said you'd turn on the TV because beyond the
footballing qualities, I've always told you, it's the man. I love the man. And then
for Barça... Yes. Ronaldinho, Ronaldo, yes, because they're players you like. I watch them
play. Wait, why aren't you at PSG or OM yet? Because the Crown didn't want you.
Oh, Coron didn't want to, and then they made me offers. Well, I could have,
you see, I could have put pressure on them, played hardball, like there's no way around it, you're going to
disrespect the coach, the president, you're going to get a... you're going to get a salad no matter what.
You're going to get a salad. But when they make you offers and you think,
what? I say, but you guys think I'm a carpet salesman? The pay raises,
they weren't... I said, I don't sell watermelons. I play football too, you know.
I said, I don't just deal in clementines, oranges, and watermelons. I say, I play
football, and I've just come out of the Champions League, the European Cup. There are three of
us from the Spanish league. Corunna at that time in the 80s, it's a team
that always goes to the Champions League. So I say, "You make an offer,
"It's not even half of what I earn at Corine, am I joking or what?" Ah,
the clubs that wanted to buy you were making you... There you go, in France. Yeah, in France. And it was
a pay raise, they implied to me, not Corbis, but in Paris at the time, they implied
that you should be proud to play for Paris for what they give you. You have to make
sacrifices to play for Paris. But you saw Jesus, Jesus, you had dinner
with him last night, what? I have a flaw, what? I'm going to sacrifice myself to play for... I'm
saying I'm going to sacrifice 75% of my salary at Corine to come and play for Paris.
I'm saying, I'm saying, call me back when you're awake, we'll have a proper discussion because right now, no,
I'm saying it's not possible. But with Roland, Roland, we were, we were just, we
agreed on certain things, but when it came time to make the agreement,
I saw myself leaving a little bit. That it wasn't very religious. I said no. I
said I'm not going through Strasbourg to come play for OM later. You go through Strasbourg.
It's stuff like, "Oh yeah, no, you had to sign first, I must have been dreaming." Yeah, no, because
actually it was the only way Deportivo La Coruña would let me go, and Corbus understood that,
actually, Deportivo. Why didn't he want me to go to a big club?
Why? I don't know. Was OM paying? Yeah, OM... No, OM, yes, certainly was paying, but
he didn't want me to go to a club. Uh, well, that's Aurorita. Aurorita was the coach
with the little glasses. There's Gargamel. I don't know Gargamel, so I can say yes, he resembled
Gargamel, always with the "la douou la par," always angry, but good coach. Yes. No, I'm
not talking about the coach, I'm talking about the person. Uh, and on a personal level with him. It didn't work. Oh no,
it's impossible. He's always angry. He's always angry. Really?
He's always angry on his wife's birthday. He's angry on her birthday. I saw the
Christmas player, he's angry, the guy wins the championship, he's angry. I say, but he was
happy, you. I say, but you're happy in life, smile a little. I didn't smile at all. And
actually, one day, I don't know, I didn't headbutt him, but I went, I went,
I put my forehead on his nose and I pushed him towards the coach. Why? Yeah,
because actually, it's like, once again, I'm telling you, you tell me I'm not good, I accept it.
You tell me I don't want you, I accept it, but you don't call me a shitty Moroccan. Oh yeah,
you understand, I was even too nice. I was even too nice.
It's not because I I thought it was because you don't play in 4-4-2 or because no, actually
he chooses his setup, anyway, and he throws me around and all the players go by
and there you go, there you go, to the right you see, to the left you see your position and he takes the thing and
throws it like this and I wait like this, but you don't pick it up, I say, but no, I
don't pick it up, I'm not, you don't tell me anything, she tells me to pick up your thing, I say no, I don't pick it up
, I have you. Since all the players, you go to them, you will have given the armband, the bib,
you tell him "Get there, get there, you're going to be a camp child." I tell him in Italian, in Spanish,
however you want. I tell him "Va maro". He says to me, he says to me "What?" I say "Go mark everything."
I say "I'm not a dog." I say "Not earlier, you already do the thing,
you put it to the right, to the left, right back, "Left back." I said, "
Who do you think I am?" Then he said, "Yeah, I was a shitty Moroccan." Understandable. And then
I went to hit him, actually, but I don't know, something held me back.
So I just pushed my forehead against his nose, I pushed him a little, and then he said, he
swore. He said, "You'll never play top-level football again." He said, "I'm going to
"I did everything." I did what you wanted. So I know that with him, because he and the president
were very close. They were friends, even family I think, because one was
Basque and the other was Basque and the other was from Galicia, it's Galicia. Galicia passes through
there. So Galicia, by the way, and the Basque, they're kind of distant cousins
. So he promised me I wasn't going to a big club and, uh, and I knew he was
involved, uh, and when I told him, he came to training the next day,
he said, "Well, you're going to Conventerie." I told him. I said, "Why Conventerie?" I said, "
Where is it?" "There's Milan, there's..." Yeah. I said, "I've been to Milan, I've been to Marseille, I've been to Paris,
I've even been to Cassul at the time." Cassul. I said, "Why are you telling me Coventry?" He said,
"Yeah, that's it, we've agreed with Conri." So, and then, I felt that, well,
I felt that when I said things, it comes down to details, to people, or to
details in football. If you come across the right person, like Gassé, like Luis
Fernandez, certainly in France, Jean-Louis Gassé, Luis Fernandez, then if we have Espanyol Barcelona,
​​after the English period, you come back to Espanyol Barcelona. There you go. And, uh, but when things went well
with Louis and Jean-Louis, even magical, magical with Jean-Louis, magical, even Louis,
Jean-Louis, he's a gem. He's majestic. He's a good man.
Oh, frankly, he's a good man. He's known for his team talks and his management, his name is, he's
a good man. That's true. Oh yeah, yeah. He is Okay. Why? He's good in every sense of the
word. Ah, Jeanlu, he's good in every sense of the word. I won't go into more detail than that. In every sense of the
word, he's a good person. He has that image, that reputation. He's good at
his communication. He's good at managing training sessions. He's good at
communicating with people. He's just good, period. People say he's good at getting
the best out of a player. What did he tell you? What did he say? What struck you? Or
what did he do individually, really individually, not on tactics,
because we know on tactics he sees everything before everyone else. I book matches
with him, he tells me about the match before the match. Yeah, but no, he follows everything, but
you see, on a human level. Yeah, in fact, he told me, and what he told me when I arrived, I was
already 33 years old. I was towards the end, 34 years old. You're coming from Aston Villa? Yeah,
I'm coming from Aston Villa and I hadn't played for 3 months. Okay. And I arrive,
I do my training, and he puts me in the game right away. I say, "But I haven't played,
it's been 3 months since I last played." He says, "You play?" But he says, "Uh, then he takes me on." He says, "I'm talking to you
as a player." I say, "But the coach will talk to you later." So he'll talk to me. So he
takes me on, he says, "But you, if you see him, who is he?" I say, "I'm not
physically ready." I've been playing for 3 months, I take free kicks, I do crosses, volleys, you
know, I work a little in front of goal. I say, "But I haven't done a sprint in 3 months." He
tells me, "That's okay, it's not a problem. I want to play in training, that's enough for me." He
tells me, "You have potential, you can..." You don't even know, you're not even aware of the potential you have.
He told me, "You know some Zidanes," and I said, "Yeah, right." He said, "I don't count,
you don't realize. You don't realize. You have potential, you have potential. I'm
not going to say as much as Zidane, but you're not far off." I said, "I've been playing football for 20 years,
and nobody ever told me I was good at football." It's true. I
always said, "Get down," he would never have said such positive things to me. I said, Jean-Louis,
I should have known you before. But that's why I'm saying this after Louis, it's extraordinary.
Louis, wait, Louis, he was going wild. Louis is everything and nothing. Louis, if he loves you and you're loyal
and you work hard and you go along with him, and he's a good person, he's a good person.
Ah, he doesn't like hypocrites, he doesn't like you playing games with him, he prefers you to come to him.
He's a man, you tell him I have things to say to his face. Yeah, that's it, he says I don't love you, I'll
play games but I don't love you. Know this, he'll accept it even if you tell him I love him and then do
things behind his back, he'll tear you apart. That's him, he's like that, everything and nothing. That's him. He's the one who needs
to be direct. That's men. That's real men. And when he came, he said to me, "I did
n't bring you here to go to the beach, you know." You saw the beach, the chocolates, the stuff, the pizzas,
the tacos... He said to me, "You do what you want?" He said to me, "You're with me here,
we're in the relegation zone." He said to me, "I brought you here to play football." I was with him,
he said to me, "Do you want to play?" I said, "Oh yeah, I came to play." I said, "
I had West Ham," I said no. I had other clubs, I said no. I came because I know
you were already trying to steal from me in Paris back then, it didn't happen. He was the one who had to. So,
you were already trying to steal from me back then and it didn't happen, and I know, I know you and we know each other
too. I played against him when he was at Bilbao. So I said, "Yes, I'm coming with great
pleasure, and I'm going to enjoy myself and make you happy." I said, "But I'm not
physically ready yet." He said, "That's another problem." He told me, "Just play. I
want you to play, I want you to help the guys. You're one of the most experienced here." And so he told me, "
I want you to lead by example." I was OK, Luis. We lost one match, just one match. I think we only
lost one match. You're safe. No, we were almost in the relegation zone in Europe
on January 1st. We were in the relegation zone in January, I think they were 8 or 9 points from safety.
9 points from safety, I think we were one point away from Europe. We
lost a match in the derby. Yeah, even the Galácticos, we beat them at home. You
beat Valencia, your Valencia, the one you love, Valencia, Pablo Mar's Valencia. Ah, Mar, a phenomenon
[__], I forgot him, Mar, when I gave you the five players. You can put him
in. Ah, that makes me happy. Ah, that makes me happy that you put Pavloar in. No, because, by the
way, do you know why I'm not putting Ronaldo and Messi in? You know, before, football was played with
skill. Yeah, played with contact. You're more skilled than me, you win. Do you understand? Today,
if I touch you a little, if I brush your eyes, you go to the dentist,
I touch your teeth, you go get your teeth fixed. We have to stop. I'm telling you,
you can't push him anymore, you're putting in a huge tackle. I'm saying before, but look at the tackles,
look at the tackles, and he asks Dimeko if he can play, if he likes
today's football. But it's good. Would you have liked to play in today's football? Oh yeah,
it was easier. Oh, you would have had an easy time of it? No, not an easy time of it, but it would have been easier.
Yeah, I wouldn't have been afraid. I would have been protected. Yeah, there are times when you think, "
He's going to break me," you think, "But what if we do it?" you say no. You have Basil Bouli or Marcel de
Sa, you say no, you have Makiléilé Makilé Jean-Claude, I'm playing against him, you do it to him once
and he'll look at you, pay attention, but you understood because otherwise you would have ended
up in your town every week, every week, so today that doesn't exist,
before you had, before taking the ball, who was the meanest, the one you played against the most?
For me it's Stan Ystam, oh yes, Manchester United and Milan. Yeah. No, no, but central defender
Dutch Dutch the head of the killer head of the skin of the skin of the skin had been
re-stitched on the bench he had broken his neck no but even already he was yeah it was
a mass I came in I'm Champions League match championship match I give him a
blow I I'm going to I say anyway I give him a blow oh I took a blow bro ah it's
you who gives him the blow it's you who gives the neck blow I took a blow I said he did
n't even look at me he didn't even look at me he didn't even see me. He didn't even see me. He didn't see me.
He didn't feel me. He didn't see me. That he stung him. And the worst the worst David David Junela David Juna,
I see him he goes into contact with him and it goes like that tr poulling. He bounced David One and
the other he does Jim to him he says. Yeah. David David, one's a monster, and the other's a big guy.
Yeah, but he was mean. Wait, he was strong but mean. He's fast. Yeah, he jumps high,
technically he gets you out of position, and when he accelerates with the ball, he's no slouch.
And his heading, you're going to, you're marking him. Uh, when he's in the air, everyone's like,
I'm not going to, but no, but that's why I told you, in football today,
the players are protected. We have an advantage, we give technically gifted players
, attacking players, we leave them alone, we protect them, we want a show. It's better. Yes,
certainly, it's better, but isn't real football being lost? When the
malice is aimed at football, isn't it lost? Isn't it beautiful? You see,
when you see Maradona, he dribbles past everyone, he uses his hand, it's beautiful, the hand of God. The
guy, he does it. Thierry Henry against England, I think against Ireland, he puts his
hand in like that, he brings it back, he pushes it, and when you go to get in front of him, the guy charges you.
Henry got massacred in France. Yes, it happened. But yes, but it's football,
it's just a guy, anyone. Would anyone who's ever played football do
that? Listen, in your life, you play football with your friends, with your mates, you play in a
little neighborhood tournament, you play. Isn't there a vice in football? Is it necessary?
If I have to handle the ball, I handle it. There you go, the guy's there, bam, you handle it,
you take it, and if the referee doesn't see it, if he's part of the forwards, that's how
football was. Yeah, the guy steps on you, the guy takes you down, he uses his skill with those
16mm, 18mm blades and steps on your toes, he goes up, he hits your head. There
's no foul. The guy puts his elbow there, his throat there, he goes bam and then he goes for
the chest, he takes it and controls it. You say, "Wow, the guy is too good." But the guy had
already committed the foul. You played against guys like Marcel Dib or Pardo, sometimes those crazy Marcel guys? Yeah.
You'd get a kick out of playing against Ivan Lourou, you'd think, but today that doesn't exist. These days they
go to prison for life, that's how football has changed, the players are protected. So
today there's more spectacle, there are more things that happen in football.
Me, me, with less pleasure. Yeah, honestly, with less pleasure. Uh, I used to watch right up
until the end with Ronaldinho and Niesta. Okay. Right up to the end. That's it. That's where I
still enjoyed it. Now, a little less. I like watching derbies, sure, but I
don't watch football the same way anymore because I know that today, if
you're an athlete, if you're fast, strong, and have stamina, well, you're going to have a good match.
If you're a player and you're an athlete and you're faster than the others and you have
a minimum level of technical skill, I know you're going to have very good matches every weekend, but before
that, it didn't exist. We also live, we're happy to come to Morocco so close to the Africa Cup of
Nations. We want to see it be beautiful. We want it to be beautiful. We say to ourselves when
Even though everything is here in Morocco to make it beautiful. If you had one
thing to say to the Moroccan team, and well, to the Moroccan fans, it would be to tell you
it's going to be beautiful, for sure. Yeah, be sure of it. It's going to be very beautiful. I'm convinced.
Why is it going to be beautiful? Because,
geographically speaking, Morocco's current position is extraordinary because it's at the gateway to Europe.
So, it will be easy for
African nationals to come back, because if you play in Burkina Faso or
Malaysia, it's complicated, so flights and everything... And then, I think the infrastructure
is all in place to ensure easy access to the stadium,
facilities for all the fans, and the conditions... I think playing in
December is a good time for football. That's important too. It's important
to play in 15, 16, 20 degree weather. It's extraordinary. That's football weather.
But what I would say, like I told you before, is that when you
come to the national team, you have to be a soldier, especially in Africa. So today, Morocco is
the team to beat, you know that. Easy status, huh? Ah, but it's better to have a status like
that because it can be advantageous. It's an advantage from the start. Well,
that's how I see it. It's an advantage from the start, but
if you don't do what it takes to be the team to beat,
then people won't respect you. They won't respect your status. Do you
like that status? I love that status because it's also intimidating, you see.
And then you have this status because you reached the World Cup semi-finals, because you had that
run of invisibility. It's good to have this status because it means you've done a lot of
things. But that's what I need to tell you, Africa, you have to change your behavior,
you have to change your mentality. When you have a status, you have to keep it. You have to fight
to keep it. You have to love that status. You have to protect it.
You have to work to keep it. You have to fight to keep it. But we
often live on illusions. Don't you think that when Algeria won the Africa Cup of Nations in Egypt,
they could have done much better afterward? Why did they stay there? It's the same
team two months later, or three months later, or four months later, or five months later. You don't change in six months, you
gain experience. It's not possible. So today, we have to stay, we have to keep this status. Me,
I prefer to be on the team to beat than to be an underdog, I'm
not interested in that. I want to be on the team to beat. Would you have liked to play in this tournament? I would have,
I would have dreamed. You, you, I would have liked, I don't know, liked. You'd trade everything to play
in this tournament. Yeah, I would have even played just one more football match, actually. That's true. Oh yeah.
You'd trade the 1998 World Cup to play in this tournament? Yeah. Why? Because it's my brother
in Morocco. Yeah. We're at home. I played in the Africa Cup of Nations in conditions
where I slept under corrugated iron sheets in 50°C heat and, uh, you have, you have, you have animals, actually. You
have mosquitoes, you get the impression they're, they're vermin. That's just how things
are. You're like, "It's 50°C, we're playing at 1:30 PM, where's the key? Uh, what am
I supposed to drink? Who's there when I'm not drinking? He's not there." We didn't have an esthetician. We did
n't have the resources for recovery that exist today. Uh,
there was nothing. So you played, you slept to recover, you tried to get some sleep.
To be at least close enough to be ready three days later to play the next match and avoid
injury. When you had an injury, you were practically finished. You had
a minor sprain, you were done for. You had nothing to recover from, or you had a minor muscle strain,
you'd say, "That's it, I'm finished." A minor muscle strain, I mean minor,
would take 10, 15 days, and you'd be fine. So today, yes, I'd change everything to play
this stupid match. Yes, of course, brother. It's about playing in Morocco, playing in the conditions today,
it's... it's magnificent, and that's why they have an incredible opportunity. They need to
shake it off and realize it, and they need to banish from their minds this curse
we have in Africa of not succeeding, because today we have a status, as I told you,
this status is very important because it can also be advantageous, as I said, it can
intimidate the opponent, and on top of that, you're playing at home. That means you have a double
chance of winning this cup, this team. You have the fans. What
will you say to the fans? No, I have nothing to say to the fans. They know very well what they're
doing. Don't worry, they don't need Mustapha to motivate them. Ah, they've been
motivated for a very long time. They're already ready. Yeah. On the other hand, I hope the players
will live up to the fans. Do you think so? Yes, we have everything we need to
succeed. But then, to live up to the Moroccan fans, we have to wake up
very early. So you guys need to prepare. Last thing, Mousse, the question I always ask
. What has no one ever asked you? What question has no one ever asked you? No one has
ever asked you throughout your career, but if we were good, we would have asked you that question.
Often, football players aren't asked, "How are you after your career?" How
do you feel, where are you at? Are you happy? Do
you move on after your career? Because, you know, it's beautiful, I told you earlier, right at the beginning,
we win when you win something, it's the death of people. And when you think about the
financial side, and people think that football players earn a lot and that
they're never asked how they are after their careers end, when is there any stability,
how are you managing? Because football players, especially us North Africans,
Africans in general—I'm talking about Africans in particular because when we earn €1,000,
€6,000 is split between 40 or 50 people, you understand? No, we earn €1,000 and it's just me,
my wife, and my son. We have 50 or even 60 people to support. So yeah, when you
interview a player, especially an African of North African or African descent, well, from
time to time, it's best to ask them where they are now. So, I'm asking you,
how are you doing today? Well, me, alhamdulillah, I'm doing really well, thank God, but
again, it's thanks to the love of the people I've kept because I haven't earned what
they've earned today. But there was a blessing in it because with what we earned,
we helped our families, our loved ones, we helped people who are close
to us, who are close to us, and we did what we could with our means. But by doing that,
I think people feel it, and when you need them, well, they reciprocate.
Maybe not financially, but they'll always be there for you. So yeah,
I'm doing well, alhamdulillah, because I know I'm not dependent on Moroccans and the people I've
helped. If I'm ever in need, maybe, yeah, I know I could
take the step of asking them for something in return. Thank you Mousse, thank you for
welcoming us into your home, what's it called? Could you tell us the name again? Here it's
Carlac. Carlac is a Polynesian word. And since my wife, she lived in
Polynesia with her uncle for a very long time, she speaks a little Polynesian, and she
found the name because there's the lake, the dam, the lake, and the star. So it's the star
of the lake. Well, it's called the star of the lake. It's just a fantastic place. There you go. But
I assure you, I haven't done much. Are you enjoying it? I'm enjoying it, I
'm enjoying it, I'm eating well. We're here, we're in a nice place. Thank you, thank you for the welcome. Thank you
very much, Mousse, thank you for your time and thank you for 2010. Just one last thing, Cappelle,
you told me about your dad. Yeah. You told me, he told you something about me. She
said a Brazilian. She said you weren't Moroccan. Oh yeah, it's not for you, it's
for your dad. That's right. Can you sign it for me? Well, of course. Oh yeah, awesome. There you go. Oh,
and it's C 98 too. There you go, so you see. Oh yeah, you'll give it to your dad. You can
sign it for me with pleasure. Oh yeah, we'll try to find one to make him win, but
you won't win this one. That's what we whisper in your ear and all. I promise you,
I have another one. I'll give it to you. I'll give it to you. With pleasure. Okay, well, we'll
do it and we'll make the other one win. Thank you very much, Mousse. Uh, well, give us your opinion. Uh, tell us,
for example, in the comments what Mustapha Haji represents for you in a certain idea of
​​football. I think we're all probably not too far from what we've said. And yeah,
it's awesome. That's why we do this, you see. It's for moments like this, to talk
about football, but also to talk about people and emotions. So, see you for lots more episodes to
enjoy together. See you very soon for new adventures and more great,
classy encounters. Thank you so much. All the best to you, bro,
you deserve it. A big thank you to My Heritage for supporting us for this episode. By the way, just a
reminder, you get 14 free days on My Heritage with your premium account if you
sign up by clicking on the link in the description or on the pinned comment. Awesome!